OVATION Model ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The OVATION (Oval Variation, Assessment, Tracking, Intensity, and Online Nowcasting) model is 
an empirical model of the intensity of the aurora developed at the Johns Hopkins University, 
Applied Physics Laboratory by Patrick Newell and co-workers. It provides a short-term (30 to 90 
minute) forecast of the location and intensity of the aurora. The forecast lead time is the 
time it takes for the solar wind to travel from the L1 observation point to Earth.

The two maps show the North and South poles of Earth respectively. The brightness and location 
of the aurora is typically shown as a green oval centered on Earth's magnetic pole. The green 
ovals turn red when the aurora is forecasted to be more intense. The sunlit side of Earth is 
indicated by the lighter blue of the ocean and the lighter color of the continents. Aurora can 
often be observed somewhere on Earth from just after sunset or just before sunrise. The aurora 
is not visible during daylight hours. The aurora does not need to be directly overhead but can 
be observed from as much as a 1000 km away when the aurora is bright and if conditions are 
right. 

The aurora is an indicator of the current geomagnetic storm conditions and provides situational 
awareness for a number of technologies. The aurora directly impacts HF radio communication and 
GPS/GNSS satellite navigation. It is closely related to the ground induce currents that impact 
electric power transition.

The OVATION model uses the solar wind velocity and interplanetary magnetic field measured at 
the L1 orbit position at 1.6 million km (1 million miles) upstream from earth as input and 
calculates three types of electron precipitation and the proton precipitation which strongly 
correlate with the aurora. An estimate of aurora viewing probability can be derived by assuming 
a linear relationship to the intensity of the aurora. This relationship was validated by 
comparison with data from the Ultraviolet imager (UVI) instrument on the NASA Polar satellite.

On occasion, the input solar wind data are either contaminated or unavailable. In those 
instances, an alternative estimate of the solar wind forcing, based on the current Kp 
geomagnetic index is used to drive the OVATION model. When this occurs, there is no forecast 
lead time.

Data Provider: Space Weather Prediction Center, NOAA [https://www.spaceweather.gov/]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
